The Joe Rogan experience.
The brain reacting to danger. Do you, did you,
did you do any interviews with people who are soldiers or inter interview
fighters or people that are involved in extreme activities? That.
Yeah, no, I haven't. Uh, I haven't done a lot of interviews. Um, I mean,
I have talked to people like that and, um, you know,
every individual cases are interesting because they give you stuff,
but it's not data. So the, the data you have to go out and collect.
Yeah. What do you got there for notes? You gotta pile notes or just, oh,
I don't know. Wanted to.
Discuss, uh, I, I just thought, uh, just brought this,
I think we covered most of what I wanna say. You know,
the amygdala is not a fear center. Behavior's not primarily a tool of the mind.
It's a tool of survival.
We think we know why we do the things we do and others do them. But, uh,
we don't really because we,
our conscious mind is not privy to all of the,
the things that the body and brain are doing.
Now,
when you wanted to examine danger and you want to examine the mind and how it
reacts to danger and fear and threats, what,
what were you trying to get out of this?
Well, I started out thinking this was a way to study emotion and, um,
<affirmative> at the time I, you know, I'd been studying these, these, uh,
human patients with the split brain surgery.
And can you explain that? Cause you, you, you glossed over that earlier,
but the split brain surgery is alleviation of epilepsy.
It's a way to control epilepsy that can't be controlled in any other way.
Medications are not working. So you have like young kids,
teenagers that have lived most of their life, uh,
is paralyzed by epilepsy and not being able to lead a life.
Uh,
there was one patient who basically his parents were constantly having to hold
him down on a mattress. He was seizing so often. So,
and this is not, this is only done in a, uh,
in a very extreme set of conditions and it's not
done that much anymore, but when it's done, it's, um,
the connections between the two sides of the brain are, are separated.
So information on one side, doesn't cross over to the other,
how do they do that? Uh,
they open up the skull, pull the two, you know,
you've got kind of two loaves of bread sitting next to each other,
and they're connected by threads, which are axons that go between them.
And so you pull apart here and you can see where those axons are when you open
up from the top. So imagine like a hot dog bun. Okay. Uh,
and so you open it up at the top and you can look
down in the center and imagine that there was like a, a bunch of, uh,
wires crossing between the two sides of the bun. So those wires would then be,
uh, surgically sectioned.
And so now you end up with two sides of the brain separate
and independent. So typically language is on the left side.
So you can talk to that side, the right side, doesn't have language. Um,
so you have to ask, well, what can it do?
So if you present a stimulus that only the right Hemis for, or seas,
and you do that by flashing a, a, a,
say a picture of an apple on the left side of space,
cuz everything to the left of the center goes to the right hemisphere and
everything to the right of center goes to the left hemisphere.
So you send a stimulus to the right hemisphere and you say, what did you see?
And the left hemisphere. Cause that's where the language is. He says,
I didn't say anything. So, okay.
You said reach into this bag and see what's in there. If the right hand goes in,
that's connected to the left atmosphere, can't find it.
The left hand goes in connected to the right atmosphere that which saw the
apple, it pulls out the apple. Whoa.
So the right hemisphere has information that the left hemisphere
can't talk about. What is.
Life like for people once they've done that operation?
Um, well slowly it,
the left hemisphere kind of comes to dominate again. And, uh, the, uh,
you know, they, they come to live with it. How.
Does it prevent.
Seizures? Well, the, the folklore of it,
I don't know if this is actually true,
but what is often said is that it prevents the seizures from jumping back and
forth, uh, and having, you know, because the, um,
the electrical activity jumping back and forth sort of gets into kind of UN
endless loop that can't stop.
But cutting that isolates the seizures in the two hemispheres and makes
each one more controllable by taking a medication. Jesus.
So imagine being the first, gotta try that out. Yeah, really.
<laugh> I got an idea. <laugh> split your brain, like a hot dog bun <laugh>.
So you, um, but it, it, what we were interested in, in,
in these patients that we were studying, my, this was my mentor, Michael Guana,
um, and I were, were studying these at, uh, Dartmouth medical school.
We were at Stony Brook out on long island.
We would drive up to Dartmouth to see these patients, um,
was how does the left hemisphere cope with the fact that
the right hemisphere is performed a behavior that the it,
the left hemisphere that you talked to didn't in. So we would,
you know, put information in the right hemisphere. The guy would stand up say,
why'd you do that? I needed to stretch, or, you know,
scratch his hand and say, oh, I had an itch. So I needed to, to scratch it.
And so time after time,
the left hemisphere would generate a narrative that made its behavior make
sense. Oh, wow.
So that's why I got interested in how non conscious systems would be generating
behaviors that we generate narratives to explain,
because at the time, uh, that we were doing this,
the idea of cognitive dissonance was very popular.
And what that means is that when cognitively,
when you do something behave,
that is incongruent with what you cognitively know,
it's disturbing, it causes dissonance.
And so you have to engage in some kind of dissonance reduction.
So our hypothesis was these narratives that the left hemisphere is generating
about, right? Hemisphere behaviors was a way of, of left hemispheres,
conscious mind. <affirmative>, um, kind of keeping it all together. The,
the consciousness thinks that it's in charge that, you know,
the brain and body are it's, you know, it's, uh, it's the, the,
the control center and everything else is, uh, there to,
to satisfy its whims.
And so it generates these narratives to keep that of unity going,
even though it's no longer unified.
That is so fascinating that the brain tries to seek some sort of an explanation
for the actions that you've provoked right.
Externally. And that's why I got into a motion. Cause well,
maybe a motion systems.
Produced these, you.
Got something, Jamie. Yeah. When I'm looking this up, uh,
alien hand syndrome came up. Do you know anything about I don't? I'm sorry.
Okay. It's a,
there's a long article explaining this thing called alien hand syndrome and also
known as Dr. Strange lo syndrome, a picture of Dr. Strange,
the explanations are very strange about people's hands doing something that
they're not explaining.
They dunno. It's, it's kind of the same. Yeah.
Do they generate an explanation when they do that?
It just explains different, uh, scenarios.
People have had like a leg walk in the wrong direction or, uh,
buttoning up your shirt with your left hand,
the right hand starts unbuttoning it. That.
Seems to be like some sort of a neurological problem.
Well, they split brain patients with, you know, they right after surgery,
when things are really like up scrolling,
it would be like pulling the pants down with one hand and pulling 'em up with
the other. Oh, wow. There's a, there's one patient I saw in the hospital,
the young kid, the left hand reaches out to grab the nurse on the.
Can I say that? Yeah. Grab the nerve and the right hand is pulling it back.
<laugh> oh my.
God. Oh my God. So there's like a physical.
Struggle. Yeah. There's like this. And you know,
and it all kind of like over time they don't come back together, but the,
they negotiate something where it's not so dramatic.
The woman who thinks her alien hand wants her to be a better person.
<laugh> yeah. See, I'm thinking these are some sort of physiologic. Yeah. Well,
it's, uh, what a crazy solution to epilepsy.
I know there's other solutions that, but that.
That is, that is a last ditch effort. Yeah.
And so for severe severe cases. Yeah. And.
I, those done that often to.
Eventually sort of achieve some sort of a normalization. Yeah.
Um, you know, the they've lived,
the kids have lived so long in the state, by the time they get their, their,
um, brains changed like that, that, um,
I don't know really ultimately, uh, what, what became of all these people.
Cause I, I moved on to other fields and um, <affirmative> but I,
I think in general they live a somewhat better life,
but I doubt they ever live a completely full normal life. I mean,
how could you after all that, but.
I'm really interested in the, the,
the brain creating these narratives to explain. Yeah. That's,
there's so many people that do things like that. Yeah. Right.
They'll try to explain their life away and give themselves excuses and give
themselves reasons for behavior.
And one of the things you see with the more irrational people is it's never
their fault. Right. It's always someone else's fault.
Well, that's the 4 billion year story that I tell how we,
how we got to these narratives. That's what it's all about.